Pandas transform (#97)
arcus/education_modules: pandas_transform/pandas_transform.md

<!--

author:   Elizabeth Drellich
email:    drelliche@chop.edu
version:  0.0.1
module_template_version: 2.0.0
language: en
narrator: UK English Female

> title: Module Title

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Using `pandas` for Tabular Data in python
```

comment:  This is an introduction to tabular data in python using `pandas` DataFrames.

> long_description: This is a longer description, which should be understandable for a lay audience. It will print under "Is this module right for me?" in the overview.

Reviewer: Need this filled in

Author: good catch, done

                      });
// Make *any* div with class 'python_data_init' a Sage cell
sagecell.makeSagecell({inputLocation: 'div.python_data_init',
                      evalButtonText: 'Run python',
                      languages: ["python"],
                      editor: 'codemirror-readonly',
                      hide: ['fullScreen', 'permalink','output','evalButton'],
                      autoeval: 'true',
                      linked: 'true',
                      linkKey: "data"
                      });       
// Make *any* div with class 'python_data' a Sage cell
sagecell.makeSagecell({inputLocation: 'div.python_data',
                      evalButtonText: 'Run python',
                      languages: ["python"],
                      hide: ['fullScreen', 'permalink'],
                      autoeval: 'false',
                      linked: 'true',
                      linkKey: "data"
                      });                
</script>
@end
-->

# Using `pandas` for Tabular Data in python

<div class = "overview">
## Overview

@comment

**Is this module right for me?** @long_description

**Estimated time to completion:** @estimated_time

> **Pre-requisites**

Reviewer: Links in the prereqs will need to be updated

Author: Not just here, all of the links to the covid data will need to be updated!!!

</div>

**Jupyter notebooks** This section depends on what makes sense for the [Hands on activity](#hands-on-activity)

The longer hands-on exercises in this module are in a Jupyter notebook. The notebook is embedded into the module and you are welcome to do the exercises there. However this will not save your work if you want to come back and see what you did in a few days. If you want that ability, you have two options:

1. If you have python on your computer, you can download he notebook and run it yourself.

2. Make and account somewhere to run it in the cloud?

## The `pandas` Package

The `pandas` [package](https://pandas.pydata.org/) lets you store, examine, and manipulate tabular data using python. Since many machine learning tools use python, it can be particularly useful to process tabular data in that same environment.

<div class = "learnmore">
Most people associate "pandas" with the large mammals [Ailuropoda melanoleuca](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giant_panda). The `pandas` package is actually a shortening of "panel data."
</div>

### Importing `pandas`

> **`import pandas`**

Reviewer: I think having these "headers" that are pure code is a little confusing -- I thought at first that they should be run. Putting in suggestions for revisions, feel free to take/leave/edit as you see fit, of course.

> **`import pandas`**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**The pandas package**
```

Because `pandas` isn't part of python, in order to use its tools you will need to **import** the pandas package at the beginning of each session you intend to use it.

The code `import pandas` tells python that you want all of the commands and tools that `pandas` has to be available to you. For example `read_csv` is a  function in `pandas` and regular python will not recognize it! You will have to tell python that a command you are using is a `pandas` command by entering `pandas.read_csv`.

> **`as pd`**

Reviewer: I think perhaps this line was supposed to be deleted?

> **`as pd`**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rename `pandas` as `pd` by convention
```

[[?]] Hint: What do we need to include at the top in order to make `pandas` commands available to us?
***
<div class = "answer">
`NameError: name 'pd' is not defined` is a helpful error message because it tells you exactly what you friend forgot: they never defined `pd`!

When you add the line `import pandas as pd` to the top of their code, it runs as it did before.

<div class="python_run">
<lia-keep>
<script type="text/x-sage">
import pandas as pd
d = {'col1': [1, 5, 7], 'col2': [3, .4, -2], 'col3':["yes", "no","blue"]};
df = pd.DataFrame(data=d);
print(df)
</script>
</lia-keep>
</div>

</div>
***

## Tabular Data in `pandas` DataFrames

The tiny DataFrame we saw in the last section was exceptional in several ways. With real data you are likely to have some challenges that just can't be replicated with something that small:

* Real data will almost always be too big to type into a DataFrame.

* Real data frequently has too many rows and columns to look at the whole dataset at once.

* Real data is often missing entries.

### Loading data
@sage
<div class="python_data_init">
<lia-keep>
<script type="text/x-sage">
import pandas as pd
</script>
</lia-keep>
</div>

> The `pandas` package can read most tabular data files and convert them into DataFrames. As long as your data is in place that the program can locate, either on your computer if you are running code on your computer, or in the cloud, all `pandas` needs to know is what type of file it is reading, and where to find that file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `pandas` package can read most tabular data files and convert them into DataFrames. As long as your data is in a place that the program can locate (either on your computer if you are running code on your computer, or in the cloud) all `pandas` needs to know is what type of file it is reading, and where to find that file.
```

> For this modules we will be looking at some fake Covid-19 testing data. This data is saved as a csv file and is hosted on [GitHub](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/arcus/education_modules/embedded_code/a_sample_module_template/covid_testing.csv).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this module we will be looking at some fake Covid-19 testing data. This data is saved as a csv file and is hosted on [GitHub](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/arcus/education_modules/embedded_code/a_sample_module_template/covid_testing.csv).
```

> For this modules we will be looking at some fake Covid-19 testing data. This data is saved as a csv file and is hosted on [GitHub](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/arcus/education_modules/embedded_code/a_sample_module_template/covid_testing.csv).

Reviewer: This is optional, but my tendency with example data is to be abundantly clear which data are fake and which are real, so learners don't worry about potentially seeing PHI they're not supposed to (or maybe that's something only I worry about when I read data tutorials?). So I would add something like "...looking at some fake Covid-19 testing data. These are example data that were made up for teaching purposes so there's no real patient information here, but they are designed to mimic realistic testing data so the values and patterns are plausible."

Author: Good thought, I'm adding a box on the previous page laying this out explicitly.

The `read_csv` function from the `pandas` library takes the location of the file as its argument. The path to the file, in this case a url, must be in quotes. Let's create a new DataFrame called `covid_testing` that will contain all of our fake Covid-19 testing data.

<div class="python_data">
<lia-keep>
<script type="text/x-sage">
covid_testing = pd.read_csv('https://raw.githubusercontent.com/arcus/education_modules/embedded_code/a_sample_module_template/covid_testing.csv')
</script>
</lia-keep>
</div>

That code didn't have any output because we didn't ask it to print anything, but it did create the `covid_testing` DataFrame. We can take a look at with `print(covid_testing)`:

<div class="python_data">
<lia-keep>
<script type="text/x-sage">
print(covid_testing)
</script>
</lia-keep>
</div>

> Unless you have an extremely wide browser window, the output above is broken into as many columns as it can fit at a time. Some interfaces will output the DataFrame and let you scroll right to see more columns, but this interface just prints as many columns as it can fit and then starts again with the next columns. Good thing it didnt't print all 15524 rows!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unless you have an extremely wide browser window, the output above is broken into as many columns as it can fit at a time. Some interfaces will output the DataFrame and let you scroll right to see more columns, but this interface just prints as many columns as it can fit and then starts again with the next columns. Good thing it didn't print all 15524 rows!
```

| File type | Read command |
| - | - |
| .csv | pd.read_csv('location')|
| .xlsx | pd.read_excel('location')|
| .ods | pd.read_excel('location')|
| .json| pd.read_json('location')|
| .html| pd.read_html('location')|
| .sql | pd.read_sql('location')|

### Column names and row indices
@sage
From now on we will add the definition of our DataFrame `covid_testing` to the set-up of each page. There is nothing for you to click here, this code ran automatically when you loaded the page:

<div class="python_data_init">
<lia-keep>
<script type="text/x-sage">
import pandas as pd
covid_testing = pd.read_csv('https://raw.githubusercontent.com/arcus/education_modules/embedded_code/a_sample_module_template/covid_testing.csv')
</script>
</lia-keep>
</div>

When a DataFrame is displayed it has a row of column names along the top, and a column of indices along the left side. In some environments, like Jupyter notebooks, these names and indices may be bolded.

The methods `.columns` and `.index` will show you all of the column and row names, respectively. **Give it a try:**

<div class="python_data">
<lia-keep>
<script type="text/x-sage">
print(covid_testing.columns)
</script>
</lia-keep>
</div>

> The column names were imported with the `.csv` file. Since the original file didn't have labels for the rows, `pandas` automatically labeled them numerically 0 through 15523. If you imported tabular data that didn't have column headers, the column names would be numeric, the way the row indices are in our `covid_testing` DataFrame.

Reviewer: When I run `print(covid_testing.index)`, it looks like the range is 0 to 15524, not 15523. Or does python give ranges that are not inclusive on the high end, perhaps? If so, worth a mention, since right now it looks like a typo.

Author: Good call! I added a help box for python ranges because they are non-intuitive and occasionally infuriating!

</div>

### Quiz: DataFrames

@sage

1. Complete the following code by replacing the two `__?__`s with your own code to find out the first and last name of the patient in row 11942.

<div class="python">
<lia-keep>
<script type="text/x-sage">
import pandas as pd
covid_testing = pd.__?__('https://raw.githubusercontent.com/arcus/education_modules/embedded_code/a_sample_module_template/covid_testing.csv')

print(covid_testing.__?__[11942, ["first_name","last_name"]])
</script>
</lia-keep>
</div>
<br>

Enter their name below to check your answer:

[[grazdan greyjoy]]
<script>
  let input = "@input".trim().toLowerCase();
  input == "grazdan greyjoy";
</script>
***
<div class = "answer">

On line 2, the command `read_csv` will convert the csv file's data into a DataFrame.

On line 4, the `.loc` method will request the data from row 11942 and columns `"first_name"` and `"last_name"`.

The completed code should look like this:

```
import pandas as pd
covid_testing = pd.read_csv('https://raw.githubusercontent.com/arcus/education_modules/embedded_code/a_sample_module_template/covid_testing.csv')

> print(covid_testing.loc[11942, ["first_name","last_name"]])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
print(covid_testing.loc[11942, ["first_name","last_name"]])

```

The final line is getting slightly cutoff by the answer box in my view. Adding a newline at the end will hopefully help.

<!--

author:   Elizabeth Drellich
email:    drelliche@chop.edu
version:  0.0.1
module_template_version: 2.0.0
language: en
narrator: UK English Female
title: Using `pandas` for Tabular Data in python

> comment:  This is an introduction to tabular data in python using `pandas` DataFrames.

Reviewer: Title and comment now strongly emphasize "tabular", but that's not actually directly addressed in the module content --- although of course all of the examples are on tabular data, there's no discussion around that. I think "Transform data with pandas" or something along those lines is a clearer indication of what the module actually teaches.

                      hide: ['fullScreen', 'permalink','output','evalButton'],
                      autoeval: 'true',
                      linked: 'true',
                      linkKey: "data"
                      });       
// Make *any* div with class 'python_data' a Sage cell
sagecell.makeSagecell({inputLocation: 'div.python_data',
                      evalButtonText: 'Run python',
                      languages: ["python"],
                      hide: ['fullScreen', 'permalink'],
                      autoeval: 'false',
                      linked: 'true',
                      linkKey: "data"
                      });                
</script>
@end
-->

# Using `pandas` for Tabular Data in python

<div class = "overview">
## Overview

@comment

**Is this module right for me?** @long_description

**Estimated time to completion:** @estimated_time

**Pre-requisites**

Before starting this module it is useful for you to:

* have some familiarity with [tabular data](tabular/data/module)
* have an introductory level exposure to coding in [python](intro/to/python/module)

**Learning Objectives**

@learning_objectives

</div>

## Lesson Preparation
@sage

> You will be doing two types of hands-on coding as you work your way through this module. You do not need any particular preparation for the first way, interactive python cells. For the second way, Jupyter notebooks, you can choose to work in your browser where you will not be able to save your work, or in a few other ways where you will.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will have opportunities for hands-on coding as you work your way through this module using interactive python cells.
```

> 
> **Interactive python cells**
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> The first will be in cells powered by [SageMathCell](https://sagecell.sagemath.org/). For the most part, these will appear with some code already in them, and you can run that code by clicking the **Run python** button. You can also edit the code in these cells and run your own code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The interactive python cells are powered by [SageMathCell](https://sagecell.sagemath.org/). For the most part, these will appear with some code already in them, and you can run that code by clicking the **Run python** button. You can also edit the code in these cells and run your own code.
```

- `b == 8` is a checking for equality. It is a question "is `b` equal to 8?" You will get an answer back, either `True` or `False`.
</div>

In addition to using `==` to check if two values are the same, we can use other relational conditions to compare values in a DataFrame.

| symbol | meaning |
| :---: | --- |
| `<` | is less than|
| `<=` | is less than or equal to |
| `>` | is greater than|
| `>=` | is greater than or equal to|

### Filtering by a condition

@sage

<div class="python_data_init">
<lia-keep>
<script type="text/x-sage">
import pandas as pd
covid_testing = pd.read_csv('https://raw.githubusercontent.com/arcus/education_modules/embedded_code/a_sample_module_template/covid_testing.csv')
</script>
</lia-keep>
</div>
<br>

When we used a column name or list of names as our argument in the row spot of the `.loc` method, we got back all rows in that list. When we put a condition  like `covid_testing.loc[:,"result"] == "positive"` in the row spot, it will return all rows for which that condition is `True`.

> If this this is a subset of the data that you are likely to want to use again, it is a good practice to create a new DataFrame consisting only of the rows and columns that you want.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If this is a subset of the data that you are likely to want to use again, it is a good practice to create a new DataFrame consisting only of the rows and columns that you want.
```

* `condition_1 | condition_2` will be TRUE if the patient is missing data in the `first_name` column, the `last_name` column, or in both columns.

* `condition_3` will be TRUE if the patient is age 18 or less.

THEREFORE:

* `my_condition` will be TRUE when **both** `condition_1 | condition_2` and `condition_3` are TRUE, when **at least one** of the columns `first_name` and `last_name` are blank, and the patient age is 18 or less.

</div>
***

## Transforming data in a DataFrame

Sometimes the data in a DataFrame isn't in the best form for us to use. Maybe it is a string that is too long or unclear, or maybe the units aren't the unit we will ultimately want to use to analyze the data.

There are two things we can do to make our data more useful.

1. Add a new column with data based on existing columns.

2. Edit the data in an existing column to improve its usefulness.

<div class ="warning">
Reproducibility must always been a priority when doing research, so whenever you are making changes to data, you must ensure that you keep a clear record of the calculations you did and even more importantly that you don't change the original copy of your data.

**Recording calculations**

> Python, and particularly Jupyter notebooks, in which you can write linked cells of code, are a great way to preserve and annotate every step of your data manipulation.

Reviewer: Wondering if you want to rework to not highlight jupyter here, since they're not actually using it. I'm okay if you just leave it, though.

</script>
</lia-keep>
</div>
<br>

In `pandas` you can create a new column by calling your new column with the `.loc[:,"new_column"]` method and using a single equals sign `=` to define its contents.

The next bit of code creates a new column named `new_column` in the DataFrame `covid_testing` in which every entry is the number 1:

<div class="python_data">
<lia-keep>
<script type="text/x-sage">
covid_testing.loc[:,"new_column"] = 1
print(covid_testing.loc[:,"new_column"])
</script>
</lia-keep>
</div>
<br>

Your new column can also depend on data in columns that already exist. Remember that each column, or series, needs to be called using the format `dataframe.loc[:,"column_name"]`.

For example maybe you need to have patient ages recorded in months instead of years:

<div class="python_data">
<lia-keep>
<script type="text/x-sage">
covid_testing.loc[:,"age_months"] = covid_testing.loc[:,"age"]*12
print(covid_testing.loc[:,["age","age_months"]])
</script>
</lia-keep>
</div>
<br>

Or maybe you want a new column that displays the full name of each patient, rather than separate columns for first and last names.

<div class="python_data">
<lia-keep>
<script type="text/x-sage">

> covid_testing.loc[:,"full_name"] = covid_testing.loc[:,"first_name"]+" " +covid_testing.loc[:,"last_name"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
covid_testing.loc[:,"full_name"] = covid_testing.loc[:,"first_name"]+" "+covid_testing.loc[:,"last_name"]
```

Just a little inconsistent use of whitespace

print(covid_testing.loc[:,["first_name", "last_name", "full_name"]])
</script>
</lia-keep>
</div>

### Edit existing columns
@sage
<div class="python_data_init">
<lia-keep>
<script type="text/x-sage">
import pandas as pd
covid_testing = pd.read_csv('https://raw.githubusercontent.com/arcus/education_modules/embedded_code/a_sample_module_template/covid_testing.csv')
</script>
</lia-keep>
</div>

You can make changes to existing entries using the same method and simply using the key that already exists for that column.

What if you wanted to reformat the gender column to use `M` and `F` instead of spelling out male and female?

**Using `=` to assign values**

One way to approach this is to define a condition testing each row for whether the entry in the `gender` column is `male`. Then we can use that condition to change the entry to `M` if the condition is met.

> <div class="python_data_init">

Reviewer: I think this should be a python_data block, right?

Author: yup!

<lia-keep>
<script type="text/x-sage">
is_male = covid_testing.loc[:, "gender"] == "male"

covid_testing.loc[is_male, "gender"] = "M"

</script>
</lia-keep>
</div>
<br>

**Using `.replace`**

You can also use the `.replace` method to change entries in a column. The grammar required can be a bit tricky, but it is worth learning to use this powerful tool.

Let's take a look a using this method to change the gender `female` to `F`. After the code block we will go through what each part of the code is doing.

<div class="python_data">
<lia-keep>
<script type="text/x-sage">
covid_testing.loc[:, "gender"] = covid_testing.loc[:, "gender"].replace("female","F")

print(covid_testing.loc[:,["first_name", "last_name", "gender"]])

</script>
</lia-keep>
</div>
<br>

* The `.replace()` method takes two arguments: the entry you want to find, and what you want to replace it with.

* Before  `.replace()` goes the DataFrame, or part of the DataFrame on which you want to find and replace the entry.

  * `dataframe.replace("a","b")` will search all columns of `dataframe` for `a` and replace them with `b`.

>   * `dataframe.loc[:,"column_1"]` will only replace `a` with `b` in the column labeled `column_1`. If another column contains the entry `a` that will remain unchanged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `dataframe.loc[:,"column_1"].replace("a","b")` will only replace `a` with `b` in the column labeled `column_1`. If another column contains the entry `a` that will remain unchanged.
```

- `covid_testing.loc[:, "last_name"] == covid_testing.loc[:, "last_name"].str.upper()` The double equals `==` mean that this is a **condition** testing whether or not the entry int the `last_name` column is already uppercase.

- `covid_testing.loc[:, "last_name"] = covid_testing.loc[:, "last_name"].str.upper()` The single equals `=` **assigns** the entry in the `last_name` column to the uppercase version.
</div>
***

<div class = "learnmore">

The method `.str.lower()` will make every entry in a column lower case. There are several [other ways to manipulate the presentation of text](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/api/pandas.Series.str.lower.html) in a pandas series.

</div>

## Additional Resources

The creators of the pandas package have [great tutorials](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/getting_started/index.html) with very thorough examples.

## Feedback

In the beginning, we stated some goals.

**Learning Objectives:**

@learning_objectives

We ask you to fill out a brief (5 minutes or less) survey to let us know:

* If we achieved the learning objectives
* If the module difficulty was appropriate
* If we gave you the experience you expected

> We gather this information in order to iteratively improve our work. Thank you in advance for filling out [our brief survey](https://redcap.chop.edu/surveys/?s=KHTXCXJJ93&module_name=%22Transform+Data+with+Pandas%22)!

Reviewer: The module name here doesn't match the current title for the module (although actually I think I prefer this one!)

Author: Good call, I'll make this the actual module name!
